Welcome back in this lecture for part one of working textfiles we're going to focus on some basic print
formatting specifically with the string literal.
We'll also discuss alignment options with string literals.
Let's get started.
All right.
I'm going to begin by showing you how before Python 3.6 you had to perform print formatting and the
way you would do this is if you had a variable for example person is equal to Jose and then you want
to insert that variable into a string you were going to print out the way you used that to do it is
by saying something like.
My name is and then you would have curly braces.
And after the string you would say the format and then pass in the variable name you want to insert
in place of the curly braces.
So if you on this I now see my name is Jose this is the old way the python 3.6.
Now 3.6 and higher now includes what's known as formatted string literals or f string literals for short.
And some people just call them as strings and it actually simplifies this entire process a lot more.
So all you need to say is print and then type a single F and then start typing out your string and then
you can say my name is.
And then inside the curly braces you can directly type in the variable name such as person here.
Essentially this F in front of the string allows you to not have to worry anymore about the stop format
call.
And then when you run this you get back the same result.
Keep in mind if you forget to type the F in front of the string then it's actually just going to literally
prints out the curly braces and whatever your variable is called.
So they'll forget you need to type in F there in order to see that.
Now the other thing I want to point out that's nice about this method is if you have a Python object
such as a dictionary.
Go ahead to make a simple dictionary like a one two three and B with the value 4 5 6.
You can actually do sort of operations within the string literal so I can say print F and my number
is.
And then inside the curly braces I can actually perform operations like d of a run that and I'll say
my number is 1 to 3.
Again I have a curly braces here.
And then inside of it I have actual operations.
It works the same for list.
So if I say my list is 0 1 2 I run that I could from my list actually index an item like 0 and then
run that and I'll say my number is 0.
OK.
So again you can do sort of just basic Python operations inside the curly braces inside of the string
literal.
Now the last thing I want to go over are actually using alignments and padding when you're dealing with
multiple items that you're trying to printout.
And we're actually going to be using this later on in the Course specifically when we start talking
up parts of speech tagging Spacey.
Spacey often prints out things in a format that doesn't look that nice and is hard to read but luckily
we can format it ourselves.
What I want to do is I'm going to copy and paste from the Python text basics working of text files notebook
a list.
So again you can open up the notebook and check out this list.
This list is just a list of tuples.
So if you run this and then check out library you should see something else like this.
I have a variable which is a list called Library.
And inside this library I have two bowls just three at a time or really just three objects and each
tuple author topic and pages and then some examples here.
So what I could do is I could say for book in library prints book Run that and I get to see all the
tuples being printed up.
The other thing I could do is start using string literals to get a little fancy here and then index
maybe just want the authors off of this so it could say whoops curly braces they're author is and then
run that and says authors author authors Twain Feinman and Hampton and so on.
So just using the indexing book with that for loop it's indexing the first item off of each of these
tuples.
Now I could use tuple in packing to do the following.
I could say Author topic and pages and library and then say print how author is and inside of this curly
braces I can just pasand author and it's the same thing.
So what I'm going to do now is print out all three of those items.
So I'm going to say Author another set of curly braces with topic and another set of curly braces with
pages.
Again I'm just using tuple and packing here to unpack the tuple and then passing in these variables
into the curly braces.
So I notice that's why they're not capitalized.
It's not technically anything to do if these three capitalized strings here is just tuple and packing
that I'm now inserting using string literals.
So if you're on this you get something that looks like this.
Now you may notice right away that it looks like the formatting is slightly sloppy here and that's because
we essentially are actually taking into account any sort of padding or any sort of space.
So if I come back to this library list and make one of these titles really long such as rafting and
water alone let me rerun this.
So now you can see I have a really long title if I just run this now my formatting is even worse.
So I see pages and then 6:0 ones all the way over here fives all the way over here and so on.
And there's a variety of ways that we can add using string literal formatting to actually fix this sort
of issue.
So the first thing you can do is you can pass in an argument for a minimum with essentially a minimum
with that each of these so-called columns could take.
So it is inside this curly braces after the variable name.
You provide a colon a another set of curly braces and then a number of minimum number spaces that should
be taken up by this variable.
So I'm going to add in for topic colon and say it should take up a minimum number of 30 spaces and then
pages.
I'll say it should take up a minimum number of 10 spaces.
So now when you run this you can see they've already begun formatting it a lot better.
So author now prints out Author and then adds in white space until it has 10 spaces and then it prints
out the topic and adds in enough white space until it takes up 30 spaces and then we have pages and
so on.
You probably noticed that pages.
It looks a little strangely aligned here and that's because of the way that it's trying to combine this
string with an integer.
Now not to worry we can actually fix this.
And there's a variety of ways we can fix this but probably the easiest is to in-between this colon and
right here at these braces for 10.
You can passen a greater than sign and then run that and it will automatically align pages here.
Now what you can also do is in between the colon and this greater than sign you can add in whatever
you want to pad the Fool 10 with.
So what are I mean by that.
Well you notice pages right now that takes up about or know about.
It takes up five characters.
But we said it must take up 10 characters which means there's actually five more characters here of
blank white space.
Sometimes you may want to fill that in with your own custom character and in order to do that you can
just pass and a character in between the colon and the greater than sign.
So I can pass in a dash and if you run this it's going to fill this up with dashes.
So now you notice that there's five dashes here.
And then my five letters equaling a total of 10 characters full.
And so on.
For these guys as well.
Now what I could also do is pass an adult here in Philadelphia Dopp and so on.
It's really up to you whatever you want to fill in dashes and dots are good choices but you could technically
like pass on a t here and it would automatically fill it up with t's.
Although something like That's not very helpful.
So I would recommend use dots or dashes.
OK.
So don't worry too much about getting into the weeds here about this formatting.
Really I just want you to see it first before you encounter it later on in the course.
It's just a way to nicely format things into tables especially when we're dealing with print out with
the Speccy library.
The last thing I want to talk about for part one is the ability for the formatting and to do this I'm
going to import it they will say from time import time I'm going to create a date time object which
is a specialized object in Python that can hold dates and time information.
So say the year is 2019 and the month is two for February and the day is 28.
Run that and then we can go ahead and print out and I could say with that string literals just print
out today run that and it prints out the date time object.
You'll notice right away that the date time object is standard.
So even if you just actually grab the object itself today it's a date time object and the standardized
way of printing it out is year month date.
And it also has time which is our minutes and seconds.
We actually didn't provide that information at that time so it just defaulted to zero hour 0 minutes
and 0 seconds.
Often you're going to want to format this yourself so that it looks nicer and you can do that is simply
after your variable name for whatever the date time object is type of colon and then you type in the
formatting you want and what you're going to do is you're going to use a specific as Taraf time code
or a time reference and you can go to as Taraf time dot org to check out a table of the directives here
which essentially means there are special codes of a percent sign.
And what they mean.
And an example.
So for example if I wanted to print out the month maybe I wanted to print out the full month that I
just look it up months a full name and it's percent signed capital B.
So what I do here is say percent sign capital B.
I run that and now I see the full month there February and maybe I want to see more information like
they can say percent sign.
And then February 20th and then maybe I want to say comma and then give me the full year.
And if I look it up in the table it's percent signed capital Y.
So run that and then we see February 28th come 2019.
So all you need to do is pass in your variable the colon and then what formatting you want for your
date time objects you can check out this website for full codes here that we don't need to memorize
them and keep in mind I don't have them memorized.
I just always look them up in this table.
The common ones I do but typically it's afine to worry about memorizing Instead you can easily look
it up.
All right.
So that concludes our discussion on print formatting.
Coming up next we're going to talk about working of text files creating a file opening the file and
then reading and writing to it.
We'll see you at the next lecture.